How to use symbolic math's toolbox in matlab to analyze the fourier series (#5899)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/index.md

### How to use symbolic maths toolbox in Matlab to analyze Fourier series
### Introduction

> Symbolic math toolbox provides an easy, intuitive and complete environment to interactively learn and apply math operations such as calculus, algebra, and differential equations. It can also perform common analytical computation such as differentiation and integration to get close form results, simplify and manipulate expression for great insights and solve algebraic and differential equations.

Reviewer: @linetachieng Looks like this suggestion was not addressed

> Symbolic math toolbox provides an easy, intuitive and complete environment to interactively learn and apply math operations such as calculus, algebra, and differential equations. It can also perform common analytical computation such as differentiation and integration to get close form results, simplify and manipulate expression for great insights and solve algebraic and differential equations.

Author: @srishilesh I addressed this issue in the second paragraph of the introduction. 'The advantage is that this toolbox is already available in MATLAB and you don't have to get it from an external source.'

> Symbolic math toolbox provides an easy, intuitive and complete environment to interactively learn and apply math operations such as calculus, algebra, and differential equations. It can also perform common analytical computation such as differentiation and integration to get close form results, simplify and manipulate expression for great insights and solve algebraic and differential equations.

Reviewer: @linetachieng I believe the peer-reviewer meant [this link](https://www.mathworks.com/products/symbolic.html)

### How to use the symbolic toolbox
This toolbox is enabled in Matlab using the function `syms`. If you have an expression `x=2*a+b` and you try to execute it in Matlab, you get an error message `undefined function or variable a` as shown below:
```Matlab
x = 2*a + b
```
output

```matlab
Undefined function or variable 'a'.
```
When using the `syms` function, the variable `x` is saved without the error message. The idea here is, when using the symbolic toolbox, you first define the symbolic variables. Symbolic variables are the undefined variables in an equation. For our expression above, our symbols are `a` and `b`, so we first define these variables using the symbolic function `syms`.
```Matlab
syms a b
```
After defining the symbols and re-run the code above, our variable is stored. So we will have;
```Matlab
syms a b
x = 2*a + b
```
Output:
```Matlab
x =
 
2*a + b
```

### Solving Fourier series using the symbolic toolbox
Let's say we have a Fourier transform shown below:

$$\int e^{(\frac{-t}{2})}u(t) e^{-jwt}dt$$

> 

Author: I have added the ajax script and so the symbols are properly displayed and no need to use the tool you recommended

> 

Reviewer 2: > I have added the ajax script and so the symbols are properly displayed and no need to use the tool you recommended

Hello @linetachieng . I am really sorry for that. Has your article ever been published without you using the script. If so, you can remove the script because it's displaying properly without the script.

----------
     w
```
Now, we find the values of `w` and then plot these values. To find the values of `w`, we use the `subs` function.
```Matlab
f_sub = subs(f, T, 0.5)
 
f_sub =
 
(2*sin(w/2))/w     % the output after execution of the code above.
```
We are now plotting the absolute values of the variable `f-sub`.
```matlab
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-pi: pi])
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-2*pi: 2*pi])
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-4*pi: 4*pi])
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-8*pi: 8*pi])
```
The output is:

![Range of -pi to pi](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-five.png)
![Range of -2pi to 2pi](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-six.png)
![Range of -4pi to 4pi](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-seven.png)
![Range of -8pi to 8pi](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-eight.png)

While making the plots, we used the `ezplot` function. `ezplot(FUN)` is used to plot function `x` over the default domain, `-2*pi<x<2*pi`.

### Conclusion

> Symbolic toolbox is a very important toolbox in Matlab to solve the differential and integration operations. The toolbox is easy to use, as we have seen in solving the Fourier transform above. Apart from this, this toolbox also finds the Laplace transform of the various equations. Also, this toolbox has a wide application in the science and engineering field.

Reviewer 2: 1. First sentence. Rewrite to "Symbolic toolbox is a very important toolbox in MATLAB in solving differential and integration operations."
2. Second sentence. Rewrite to "It is easy to use as we have seen in solving the Fourier series above." I believe it's Fourier series not Transform. They are different, right?
3. Third sentence- "Apart from this, this toolbox helps find the Laplace transform of various equations."
4. Last sentence - "Generally, this toolbox has a wide application in the science and engineering field."

For the conclusion part, it is always nice to summarise what you have talked about in the article in order.

More importantly, talk about how the Symbolic Math toolbox has helped analyze the Fourier series. Or how it helps. You can do this before the conclusion or at the introduction.

### ### Prerequisites
To follow along with this tutorial, you will need:
- [MATLAB](https://www.mathworks.com/products/get-matlab.html?s_tid=gn_getml) installed.
- Proper understanding of [MATLAB basics](/engineering-education/getting-started-with-Matlab/).

### Symbolic math toolbox
This toolbox has a wide range of applications:
1. You can use this toolbox to visualize analytical expressions in 2-D and 3-D and even animate plots to create videos from it.
2. Symbolic math in the live editor(mode in Matlab) lets you interactively update and display Symbolic math computations. Also, Matlab code formatted text, equations, and images can be published as executable live scripts, PDFs, or HTML documents. While working with analytical problems, you can get suggestions for the next step. These suggestions help you insert and execute function calls or live editor tasks directly into live scripts.
3. In addition to providing exact rational math, the Symbolic toolbox provides precision for higher or lower positions, allowing algorithms to run higher or lower than Matlab's in-built double. It also includes units for working with physical quantities and performing dimensional analysis.

> ![Units for working with physical quantities](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-Matlab-to-analyze-the-Fourier-series/symbolic-one.jpeg)

Reviewer 2: It seems you missed my point on the word MATLAB being in upper case. It should be MATLAB, not Matlab. And this does not apply to the branch name.

*This is an example of how this toolbox adds units for physical quantities*

4. This toolbox is widely applied in many engineering and scientific application such as optimization, where symbolic expressions of exact gradient and Hessians improves accuracy and speed of optimization.
5. In non-linear control design, the Symbolic toolbox improves recalculation speed at any operating point during execution. Furthermore, you can integrate symbolic results with Matlab and Simulink applications by converting symbolic expressions into numeric Matlab functions, Simulink, and Simscape blocks.

> ![converting functions to simulink](symbolic-two.jpeg.jpeg)

Reviewer 2: Check this image link.

*Sample of function converted to Simulink*

Now, all these applications discussed above were to give you an insight into the wide application of this toolbox. However, not all of them are discussed here. Here, we will only major in using the toolbox to solve Fourier series problems.

### How to use the symbolic toolbox
This toolbox is enabled in Matlab using the function `syms`. If you have an expression `x=2*a+b`, and you try to execute it in Matlab, you get an error message *undefined function or variable 'a'* as shown below:
```Matlab
x = 2*a + b
```

> Output

Reviewer 2: Add a colon

```Matlab
Undefined function or variable 'a'.
```
When using the `syms` function, the variable `x` is saved without the error message. The idea here is, when using the sSymbolic toolbox, you first define the symbolic variables. Symbolic variables are the undefined variables in an equation. For our expression above, our symbols are `a` and `b`, so we first define these variables using the symbolic function `syms`.
```Matlab
syms a b
```
After defining the symbols and rerunning the code above, our variables are stored. We will have:
```Matlab
syms a b
x = 2*a + b
```
Output:
```Matlab
x =
 
2*a + b
```

### Solving Fourier series using the symbolic toolbox
Let's say we have a Fourier transform shown below:

$$\int e^{(\frac{-t}{2})}u(t) e^{-jwt}dt$$

The symbol variables are t, w, T, and W, which we define by executing the command below:
```Matlab
syms t w T W
```
`w` is the angle theta.
`T` is the time function.

> `W` is used to express the angular radians in the Fourier transform.

Reviewer 2: Fourier series or transform? Or there's no difference? @linetachieng

Author: No difference

After declaration of the symbol variables, you can write the Fourier transform as shown below:
```Matlab
f = int(exp(-t/2)*exp(-j*w*t), t, [0, inf])
```
In Matlab, `int` is used to mean integration. In the expression in Matlab above:
`exp(-t/2)` is our equation which we are finding its Fourier transform. 
`exp(-j*w*t)` is the basic function of the Fourier transform.
`t` shows that we are differentiating with respect to time.
`[0, inf]` shows the integration limits from `0` to `infinity`.

> Note that we don't write `f(t)` when writing our equation in Matlab. It is because we already know that our function is a time function. Also, `t` is a symbol variable, so we do not write it in our expression.

When the above program is executed, we get the output below:
```Matlab
f =
 
2/(1 + w*2i) - (2*limit(exp(-t/2)*exp(-t*w*1i), t, Inf))/(1 + w*2i)
```

> For formatting of this output to a user-friendly manner, we use a function pretty(). `pretty(f)` prints the symbolic expression `f` in a format that resembles type-set mathematical equations.

Reviewer 2: ....we use a function `pretty()`- blockquotes

```matlab
 pretty(f)
           /             /   t \              \
           |    lim   exp| - - | exp(-t w 1i) | 2
    2      \ t -> Inf    \   2 /              /
-------- - --------------------------------------
1 + w 2i                  1 + w 2i
```

> Now, we need to get the values of `w` since we use them to plot the Fourier transform. To get the values, we execute the code below:

Reviewer 2: Again transform or series? If it should be series, please rectify in any other part of the file.

```
Now, we plot these values using the `plot()` function.
```Matlab
subplot(2, 1, 2);
plot(angle(double(f_sub)));   %angle are the w values.
title('phase spectrum')   % title
```
`plot(angle(double(data_value)))` gives the phase spectrum plot. The function `subplot()` is for making a subplot. The `title()` gives the plot a title.  

![phase spectrum](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-three.png)
*Phase spectrum plot*

Now lets plot the magnitude response using the same values of `w`.
```Matlab
subplot(2, 1, 1); 
plot(abs(double(f_sub))); %magnitude spectrum plot
title('magnitude spectrum')
```
The code `plot(abs(double(data_values)))` gives the magnitude spectrum. This plot uses the absolute values of the data, thus `abs()`.

![magnitude spectrum](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-four.png)

> *Magnitude spectrum plot*

Reviewer 2: Then for all the image descriptions, add a linebreak(space) in between the image and the description because in the preview, they render on the same line.

*Phase spectrum plot*

Now lets plot the magnitude response using the same values of `w`.
```MATLB
subplot(2, 1, 1); 
plot(abs(double(f_sub))); %magnitude spectrum plot
title('magnitude spectrum')
```
The code `plot(abs(double(data_values)))` gives the magnitude spectrum. This plot uses the absolute values of the data, thus `abs()`.

![magnitude spectrum](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-four.png)

*Magnitude spectrum plot*

### Example 2
lets look at another example:
![example 2](/engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/symbolic-nine.jpeg)

We will have:
```MATLAB
syms t w T W
f = int(1*exp(-j*w*t), t, [-T, T])
```
The output here is:
```MATLAB
f =
 
(2*sin(T*w))/w
``` 
pretty(f) gives:
```MATLAB
2 sin(T w)
----------
     w
```
Now, we find the values of `w` and then plot these values. To find the values of `w`, we use the `subs()` function.
```MATLAB
f_sub = subs(f, T, 0.5)
 
f_sub =
 
(2*sin(w/2))/w     % the output after execution of the code above.

> ```

Reviewer 2: In this snippet, you have put the code and output in the same block. Seperate them

Reviewer: This suggestion was not addressed

We are now plotting the absolute values of the variable `f-sub`.
```MATLAB
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-pi: pi])
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-2*pi: 2*pi])
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-4*pi: 4*pi])
ezplot(abs(f_sub), [-8*pi: 8*pi])

> ```

Reviewer 2: For this part, you can seperate and put them in different snippets(blocks). Thereafter, add each output image below the corresponding snippets. This is because when I ran this, it only showed the plot for the last line.

---
layout: engineering-education
status: publish
published: true

> url: /how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/

Reviewer: For the article directory, please avoid using `'`.

The directory should always be in lowercase, separated by `-`.

If possible, try to make the path a little smaller.

Author: @srishilesh how can I change the folder name?

Reviewer: You would have to rename the folder. And, also edit the same in this file too.

Reviewer 2: > For the article directory, please avoid using `'`.
> 
> The directory should always be in lowercase, separated by `-`.
> 
> If possible, try to make the path a little smaller.

@srishilesh, it now looks good. The folder name is changed. The tag added. Any more recommendations?

title: How to use the symbolic maths toolbox in MATLAB to analyze the Fourier series
description: In this article, we are going to use the Symbolic math toolbox in MATLAB to analyze the Fourier series
author: linet-achieng
date: 2022-01-12T00:00:00-11:10
topics: [Languages]
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
images:

  - url: /engineering-education/how-to-use-symbolic-math's-toolbox-in-matlab-to-analyze-the-fourier-series/hero.jpg
    alt: How to use the symbolic math toolbox in MATLAB to analyze the Fourier series hero image
---

> ### How to use the Symbolic math toolbox in MATLAB to analyze the Fourier series
> 
> ### Introduction
> Symbolic math toolbox provides an easy, intuitive and complete environment to interactively learn and apply math operations such as calculus, algebra, and differential equations. It can also perform common analytical computation such as differentiation and integration to get close form results, simplify and manipulate expression for great insights and solve algebraic and differential equations.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Symbolic math toolbox provides an easy, intuitive and complete environment to interactively learn and apply math operations such as calculus, algebra, and differential equations. It can also perform common analytical computation such as differentiation and integration to get close form results, simplify and manipulate expression for great insights and solve algebraic and differential equations.
<!--more-->
```

Reviewer 2: @linetachieng, kindly add that more tag as suggested by @srishilesh. @srishilesh, what is it for though? I've never encountered it.

Reviewer: This comes as a part of the front matter, which is to be added by the peer reviewer.

It separates the first paragraph with the rest of the article.

So, the first paragraph will be displayed as a description along with the title and hero image.

For more info, refer the peer reviewer guidelines for adding front matter.

Reviewer 2: > This comes as a part of the front matter, which is to be added by the peer reviewer.
> 
> It separates the first paragraph with the rest of the article.
> 
> So, the first paragraph will be displayed as a description along with the title and hero image.
> 
> For more info, refer the peer reviewer guidelines for adding front matter.

Alright

*Sample of function converted to Simulink*

Now, all these applications discussed above were to give you an insight into the wide application of this toolbox. However, not all of them are discussed here. Here, we will only major in using the toolbox to solve Fourier series problems.

### How to use the symbolic toolbox
This toolbox is enabled in MATLAB using the function `syms`. If you have an expression `x=2*a+b`, and you try to execute it in Matlab, you get an error message *undefined function or variable 'a'* as shown below:

```MATLAB
x = 2*a + b
```
Output:

```MATLAB
Undefined function or variable 'a'.
```
When using the `syms` function, the variable `x` is saved without the error message. The idea here is, when using the Symbolic toolbox, you first define the symbolic variables. Symbolic variables are the undefined variables in an equation. For our expression above, our symbols are `a` and `b`, so we first define these variables using the symbolic function `syms`.

```MATLAB
syms a b
```
After defining the symbols and rerunning the code above, our variables are stored in our workspace. We will then have:

```MATLAB
syms a b
x = 2*a + b
```
Output:

```MATLAB

> x =
>  
> 2*a + b

Reviewer: ```suggestion
x = 2*a + b
```

Author: @srishilesh these are the outputs and @munubi254 said they should be copied as they are. If you execute the commands in the command window, you get the outputs as I have given them out.

Reviewer: @linetachieng  Got it.  Aren't these outputs from a bash terminal? If so, please modify the type of code snippet to bash

Reviewer 2: > @linetachieng Got it. Aren't these outputs from a bash terminal? If so, please modify the type of code snippet to bash

@srishilesh, they are MATLAB outputs. I suggested that she copy pastes them as they are.

```

### Solving Fourier series using the symbolic toolbox
Let's say we have a Fourier transform shown below:

$$\int e^{(\frac{-t}{2})}u(t) e^{-jwt}dt$$

The symbolic variables are `t`, `w`, `T`, and `W`, which we define by executing the command below:

```MATLAB
syms t w T W
```
`w` is the angle theta.
`T` is the time function.
`W` is used to express the angular radians in the Fourier transform.

After the declaration of the symbolic variables, you can write the Fourier transform as shown below:

```MATLAB
f = int(exp(-t/2)*exp(-j*w*t), t, [0, inf])
```
In MATLAB, `int` is used to mean integration. In the MATLAB expression above:
`exp(-t/2)` is our equation which we are finding its Fourier transform. 
`exp(-j*w*t)` is the basic function of the Fourier transform.
`t` shows that we are differentiating with respect to time.
`[0, inf]` shows the integration limits from `0` to `infinity`.

> Note that we don't write `f(t)` when writing our equation in MATLAB. It is because we already know that our function is a time function. Also, `t` is a symbol variable, so we do not write it in our expression.

When the above program is executed, we get the output below:

```MATLAB

> f =
>  
> 2/(1 + w*2i) - (2*limit(exp(-t/2)*exp(-t*w*1i), t, Inf))/(1 + w*2i)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
f = 2/(1 + w*2i) - (2*limit(exp(-t/2)*exp(-t*w*1i), t, Inf))/(1 + w*2i)
```
